Mindy is an implementation of a language that is very much like the
language described in the Dylan(tm) Interim Reference Manual (DIRM).
The name "Mindy" is derived from "Mindy Is Not Dylan Yet", and as the
name implies, Mindy is incomplete.  Mindy is incomplete for the
following reasons:

   1] We do not implement everything in the DIRM.
   2] The DIRM does not specify all that Apple(tm) intends Dylan to be.
   3] At present there is no validation procedure for Dylan and no
      procedure for licensing the use of the trademarked Dylan name.

However, Mindy does implement most of what we believe Dylan will be.

Mindy was developed by the Gwydion Project at Carnegie Mellon
University for our own internal use as a development tool while we
work on our "real" high-performance Dylan implementation.  We have
decided to make Mindy available for other people who want to learn
about Dylan.  However, the amount of effort that we can put into
maintaining Mindy is strictly limited.

Mindy will never be an industrial-strength implementation, and nobody
should depend on it for real work.  We will make future releases from
time to time as we add new features and fix bugs, but this is strictly
a sideshow for us.  We would appreciate receiving bug reports
(especially those accompanied by code patches) and suggestions for
improvements, but we may not fix every bug reported in a timely
manner, or fix it at all.  Our work on development of the "real"
Gwydion/Dylan must take precedence.

We hope that nobody will draw any conclusions about the performance of
our future Gwydion/Dylan compiler or the performance attainable in
Dylan from experience using Mindy.  It's not designed to be fast.

Mindy consists of two C programs, a compiler that produces byte-codes
and a byte-code interpreter.  Currently, building Mindy requires an
ANSI C compiler and a ''make'' utility.  If you wish to recompile the
lexer or parser (they come pre-compiled to portable C), you will need
GNU's Flex and Bison, respectively.  They can be obtained from
   prep.ai.mit.edu  in the directory pub/gnu

We have built and tested Mindy under MACH on the DECstation and HP-UX
on HP 700's.  We have built and run Mindy, but not tested it
extensivly, under Irix, Linux, SunOS, AIX, Solaris, Ultrix, and
Windows/NT.

The Mindy release also includes some rough documentation, various
libraries (Streams, Format, Print, Collection-extensions,
String-extensions, and Random-numbers), and a Dylan mode for
Gnu-emacs.

You can get Mindy from our public WWW page:
   http://legend.gwydion.cs.cmu.edu:8001/gwydion/
You can also get Mindy by anonymous ftp from legend.gwydion.cs.cmu.edu
in the following file:
   /afs/cs.cmu.edu/project/gwydion/release/mindy.tar.gz

You must cd in one command line to the directory containing
mindy.tar.gz due to security measures at CMU.  Questions, comments,
and suggestions should go to "gwydion-bugs@cs.cmu.edu"

NOTE: MINDY IS MADE AVAILABLE WITHOUT CHARGE ON AN "AS-IS" BASIS.
NEITHER THE AUTHORS NOR CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY OFFER ANY WARRANTY
WHATSOEVER CONCERNING THIS SOFTWARE, ITS PERFORMANCE, ITS USABILITY,
OR ITS CONFORMITY TO ANY SPECIFICATION.

Have fun and hope you enjoy,
Gwydion Project
